.. _tutorial:

Running ElastAlert 2
********************

ElastAlert 2 can easily be run as :ref:`a Docker container<docker-instructions>`
or directly on your machine as :ref:`a Python package<python-instructions>`.
If you are not interested in modifying the internals of  ElastAlert, the Docker
container is recommended for ease of use.

.. _elastalert-arguments:

Configuration flags
===================

However you choose to run ElastAlert, the ElastAlert process is started by invoking
``python elastalert/elastalert.py``.

This command accepts several configuration flags:

``--config`` will specify the configuration file to use. The default is
``config.yaml``. See :ref:`here<configuration>` to understand what behaviour
can be configured in this file.

``--debug`` will run ElastAlert in debug mode. This will increase the logging
verboseness, change all alerts to ``DebugAlerter``, which prints alerts and
suppresses their normal action, and skips writing search and alert metadata back
to Elasticsearch. Not compatible with `--verbose`.

``--verbose`` will increase the logging verboseness, which allows you to see
information about the state of queries. Not compatible with `--debug`.

``--start <timestamp>`` will force ElastAlert to begin querying from the given
time, instead of the default, querying from the present. The timestamp should be
ISO8601, e.g.  ``YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS`` (UTC) or with timezone
``YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS-08:00`` (PST). Note that if querying over a large date
range, no alerts will be sent until that rule has finished querying over the
entire time period. To force querying from the current time, use "NOW".

``--end <timestamp>`` will cause ElastAlert to stop querying at the specified
timestamp. By default, ElastAlert will periodically query until the present
indefinitely.

``--rule <rule.yaml>`` will only run the given rule. The rule file may be a
complete file path or a filename in ``rules_folder`` or its subdirectories.

``--silence <unit>=<number>`` will silence the alerts for a given rule for a
period of time. The rule must be specified using ``--rule``. <unit> is one of
days, weeks, hours, minutes or seconds. <number> is an integer. For example,
``--rule noisy_rule.yaml --silence hours=4`` will stop noisy_rule from
generating any alerts for 4 hours.

``--es_debug`` will enable logging for all queries made to Elasticsearch.

``--es_debug_trace <trace.log>`` will enable logging curl commands for all
queries made to Elasticsearch to the specified log file. ``--es_debug_trace`` is
passed through to `elasticsearch.py
<http://elasticsearch-py.readthedocs.io/en/master/index.html#logging>`_ which
logs `localhost:9200` instead of the actual ``es_host``:``es_port``.

``--end <timestamp>`` will force ElastAlert to stop querying after the given
time, instead of the default, querying to the present time. This really only
makes sense when running standalone. The timestamp is formatted as
``YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS`` (UTC) or with timezone ``YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS-XX:00``
(UTC-XX).

``--pin_rules`` will stop ElastAlert from loading, reloading or removing rules
based on changes to their config files.

.. _docker-instructions:

As a Docker container
=====================

If you're interested in a pre-built Docker image check out the
`elastalert2
<https://hub.docker.com/r/jertel/elastalert2>`_ project on Docker Hub.

Be aware that the ``latest`` tag of the image represents the latest commit into
the master branch. If you prefer to upgrade more slowly you will need utilize a
versioned tag, such as ``2.1.0`` instead, or ``2`` if you are comfortable with
always using the latest released version of ElastAlert 2.

A properly configured config.yaml file must be mounted into the container during
startup of the container. Use the `example file
<https://github.com/jertel/elastalert2/blob/master/config.yaml.example>`_
provided as a template, and once saved locally to a file such as
``/tmp/elastalert.yaml``, run the container as follows:

.. code-block::

    docker run -d -v /tmp/elastalert.yaml:/opt/elastalert/config.yaml jertel/elastalert2

To build the image locally run the following command:

.. code-block::

    docker build . -t elastalert2

.. _kubernetes-instructions:

As a Kubernetes deployment
==========================

The Docker container for ElastAlert 2 can be used directly as a Kubernetes
deployment, but for convenience, a Helm chart is also available. See the
instructions provided `on Github
<https://github.com/jertel/elastalert2/blob/master/chart/elastalert2/README.md>`_
for more information on how to install, configure, and run the chart.

.. _python-instructions:

As a Python package
===================

Requirements
------------

- Elasticsearch
- ISO8601 or Unix timestamped data
- Python 3.9
- pip, see requirements.txt
- Packages on Ubuntu 18.x: build-essential python3-pip python3.6 python3.6-dev libffi-dev libssl-dev
- Packages on Ubuntu 20.x: build-essential python3-pip python3.6 python3.6-dev libffi-dev libssl-dev 
- Packages on CentOS 7.x: 'Development Tools' python3-pip python36 python3-devel python3-libs python3-setuptools libffi-devel openssl-devel
- Packages on CentOS 8.x: 'Development Tools' python3-pip python36 python3-devel python3-setuptools python3-libs libffi-devel openssl-devel

Downloading and Configuring
---------------------------

You can either install the latest released version of ElastAlert 2 using pip::

    $ pip install elastalert2

or you can clone the ElastAlert2 repository for the most recent changes::

    $ git clone https://github.com/jertel/elastalert2.git

Install the module::

    $ pip install "setuptools>=11.3"
    $ python setup.py install

Depending on the version of Elasticsearch, you may need to manually install the
correct version of elasticsearch-py.

Elasticsearch 5.0+::

    $ pip install "elasticsearch>=5.0.0"

Next, open up config.yaml.example. In it, you will find several configuration
options. ElastAlert may be run without changing any of these settings.

``rules_folder`` is where ElastAlert will load rule configuration files from. It
will attempt to load every .yaml file in the folder. Without any valid rules,
ElastAlert will not start. ElastAlert will also load new rules, stop running
missing rules, and restart modified rules as the files in this folder change.
For this tutorial, we will use the example_rules folder.

``run_every`` is how often ElastAlert will query Elasticsearch.

``buffer_time`` is the size of the query window, stretching backwards from the
time each query is run. This value is ignored for rules where
``use_count_query`` or ``use_terms_query`` is set to true.

``es_host`` is the address of an Elasticsearch cluster where ElastAlert will
store data about its state, queries run, alerts, and errors. Each rule may also
use a different Elasticsearch host to query against.

``es_port`` is the port corresponding to ``es_host``.

``use_ssl``: Optional; whether or not to connect to ``es_host`` using TLS; set
to ``True`` or ``False``.

``verify_certs``: Optional; whether or not to verify TLS certificates; set to
``True`` or ``False``. The default is ``True``

``ssl_show_warn``: Optional; suppress TLS and certificate related warnings; set
to ``True`` or ``False``. The default is ``True``.

``client_cert``: Optional; path to a PEM certificate to use as the client
certificate

``client_key``: Optional; path to a private key file to use as the client key

``ca_certs``: Optional; path to a CA cert bundle to use to verify SSL
connections

``es_username``: Optional; basic-auth username for connecting to ``es_host``.

``es_password``: Optional; basic-auth password for connecting to ``es_host``.

``es_bearer``: Optional; bearer token authorization for connecting to
``es_host``. If bearer token is specified, login and password are ignored.

``es_url_prefix``: Optional; URL prefix for the Elasticsearch endpoint.

``statsd_instance_tag``: Optional; prefix for statsd metrics.

``statsd_host``: Optional; statsd host.

``es_send_get_body_as``: Optional; Method for querying Elasticsearch - ``GET``,
``POST`` or ``source``. The default is ``GET``

``writeback_index`` is the name of the index in which ElastAlert will store
data. We will create this index later.

``alert_time_limit`` is the retry window for failed alerts.

Save the file as ``config.yaml``

Setting Up Elasticsearch
------------------------

ElastAlert saves information and metadata about its queries and its alerts back
to Elasticsearch. This is useful for auditing, debugging, and it allows
ElastAlert to restart and resume exactly where it left off. This is not required
for ElastAlert to run, but highly recommended.

First, we need to create an index for ElastAlert to write to by running
``elastalert-create-index`` and following the instructions::

    $ elastalert-create-index
    New index name (Default elastalert_status)
    Name of existing index to copy (Default None)
    New index elastalert_status created
    Done!

For information about what data will go here, see :ref:`ElastAlert Metadata
Index <metadata>`.

Creating a Rule
---------------

Each rule defines a query to perform, parameters on what triggers a match, and a
list of alerts to fire for each match. We are going to use
``example_rules/example_frequency.yaml`` as a template::

    # From example_rules/example_frequency.yaml
    es_host: elasticsearch.example.com
    es_port: 14900
    name: Example rule
    type: frequency
    index: logstash-*
    num_events: 50
    timeframe:
      hours: 4
    filter:
    - term:
        some_field: "some_value"
    alert:
    - "email"
    email:
    - "elastalert@example.com"

``es_host`` and ``es_port`` should point to the Elasticsearch cluster we want to
query.

``name`` is the unique name for this rule. ElastAlert will not start if two
rules share the same name.

``type``: Each rule has a different type which may take different parameters.
The ``frequency`` type means "Alert when more than ``num_events`` occur within
``timeframe``." For information other types, see :ref:`Rule types <ruletypes>`.

``index``: The name of the index(es) to query. If you are using Logstash, by
default the indexes will match ``"logstash-*"``.

``num_events``: This parameter is specific to ``frequency`` type and is the
threshold for when an alert is triggered.

``timeframe`` is the time period in which ``num_events`` must occur.

``filter`` is a list of Elasticsearch filters that are used to filter results.
Here we have a single term filter for documents with ``some_field`` matching
``some_value``. See :ref:`Writing Filters For Rules <writingfilters>` for more
information. If no filters are desired, it should be specified as an empty list:
``filter: []``

``alert`` is a list of alerts to run on each match. For more information on
alert types, see :ref:`Alerts <alerts>`. The email alert requires an SMTP server
for sending mail. By default, it will attempt to use localhost. This can be
changed with the ``smtp_host`` option.

``email`` is a list of addresses to which alerts will be sent.

There are many other optional configuration options, see :ref:`Common
configuration options <commonconfig>`.

All documents must have a timestamp field. ElastAlert will try to use
``@timestamp`` by default, but this can be changed with the ``timestamp_field``
option. By default, ElastAlert uses ISO8601 timestamps, though unix timestamps
are supported by setting ``timestamp_type``.

As is, this rule means "Send an email to elastalert@example.com when there are
more than 50 documents with ``some_field == some_value`` within a 4 hour
period."

Testing Your Rule
-----------------

Running the ``elastalert-test-rule`` tool will test that your config file
successfully loads and run it in debug mode over the last 24 hours::

    $ elastalert-test-rule example_rules/example_frequency.yaml

If you want to specify a configuration file to use, you can run it with the
config flag::

    $ elastalert-test-rule --config <path-to-config-file> example_rules/example_frequency.yaml

The configuration preferences will be loaded as follows:
    1. Configurations specified in the yaml file.
    2. Configurations specified in the config file, if specified.
    3. Default configurations, for the tool to run.

See :ref:`the testing section for more details <testing>`

Running ElastAlert
------------------

There are two ways of invoking ElastAlert. As a daemon, through Supervisor
(http://supervisord.org/), or directly with Python. For easier debugging
purposes in this tutorial, we will invoke it directly::

    $ python -m elastalert.elastalert --verbose --rule example_frequency.yaml  # or use the entry point: elastalert --verbose --rule ...
    No handlers could be found for logger "Elasticsearch"
    INFO:root:Queried rule Example rule from 1-15 14:22 PST to 1-15 15:07 PST: 5 hits
    INFO:Elasticsearch:POST http://elasticsearch.example.com:14900/elastalert_status/elastalert_status?op_type=create [status:201 request:0.025s]
    INFO:root:Ran Example rule from 1-15 14:22 PST to 1-15 15:07 PST: 5 query hits (0 already seen), 0 matches, 0 alerts sent
    INFO:root:Sleeping for 297 seconds

ElastAlert uses the python logging system and ``--verbose`` sets it to display
INFO level messages. ``--rule example_frequency.yaml`` specifies the rule to
run, otherwise ElastAlert will attempt to load the other rules in the
example_rules folder.

Let's break down the response to see what's happening.

``Queried rule Example rule from 1-15 14:22 PST to 1-15 15:07 PST: 5 hits``

ElastAlert periodically queries the most recent ``buffer_time`` (default 45
minutes) for data matching the filters. Here we see that it matched 5 hits:

.. code-block::

    POST http://elasticsearch.example.com:14900/elastalert_status/elastalert_status?op_type=create [status:201 request:0.025s]

This line showing that ElastAlert uploaded a document to the elastalert_status
index with information about the query it just made:

.. code-block::

    Ran Example rule from 1-15 14:22 PST to 1-15 15:07 PST: 5 query hits (0 already seen), 0 matches, 0 alerts sent

The line means ElastAlert has finished processing the rule. For large time
periods, sometimes multiple queries may be run, but their data will be processed
together. ``query hits`` is the number of documents that are downloaded from
Elasticsearch, ``already seen`` refers to documents that were already counted in
a previous overlapping query and will be ignored, ``matches`` is the number of
matches the rule type outputted, and ``alerts sent`` is the number of alerts
actually sent. This may differ from ``matches`` because of options like
``realert`` and ``aggregation`` or because of an error.

``Sleeping for 297 seconds``

The default ``run_every`` is 5 minutes, meaning ElastAlert will sleep until 5
minutes have elapsed from the last cycle before running queries for each rule
again with time ranges shifted forward 5 minutes.

Say, over the next 297 seconds, 46 more matching documents were added to
Elasticsearch::


    INFO:root:Queried rule Example rule from 1-15 14:27 PST to 1-15 15:12 PST: 51 hits
    ...
    INFO:root:Sent email to ['elastalert@example.com']
    ...
    INFO:root:Ran Example rule from 1-15 14:27 PST to 1-15 15:12 PST: 51 query hits, 1 matches, 1 alerts sent

The body of the email will contain something like::

    Example rule

    At least 50 events occurred between 1-15 11:12 PST and 1-15 15:12 PST

    @timestamp: 2015-01-15T15:12:00-08:00

If an error occurred, such as an unreachable SMTP server, you may see:

.. code-block::

    ERROR:root:Error while running alert email: Error connecting to SMTP host: [Errno 61] Connection refused


Note that if you stop ElastAlert and then run it again later, it will look up
``elastalert_status`` and begin querying at the end time of the last query. This
is to prevent duplication or skipping of alerts if ElastAlert is restarted.

By using the ``--debug`` flag instead of ``--verbose``, the body of email will
instead be logged and the email will not be sent. In addition, the queries will
not be saved to ``elastalert_status``.

Disabling a Rule
----------------

To stop a rule from executing, add or adjust the `is_enabled` option inside the
rule's YAML file to `false`. When ElastAlert reloads the rules it will detect
that the rule has been disabled and prevent it from executing. The rule reload
interval defaults to 5 minutes but can be adjusted via the `run_every`
configuration option.

Optionally, once a rule has been disabled it is safe to remove the rule file, if
there is no intention of re-activating the rule. However, be aware that removing
a rule file without first disabling it will _not_ disable the rule!

